Meet the Local Associations
3: Halifax and its Social Club
by Frank W. Skinner
The work undertaken by Halifax in connection with a Social Club for the mentally-
disordered, outlined below, represents a major part of their members' interests in
mental health work. Readers will recall Dr. Russell Barton's address to the 1961
A.G.M. of the N.A.M.H., on Social Clubs, printed in the Winter 1961/62 issue of
"Mental Health", in which he analysed replies from a questionnaire sent to 95 such clubs.
IT is now generally appreciated that
the Mental Health Act with its
implications for community care
represents a challenge to local Mental
Health Associations in providing
services designed to meet the many
needs of patients discharged from
mental hospitals. One form of service
which lends itself to participation by
a local Association is that of the
therapeutic social club. This is by no
means a new development, as such
clubs have been operating in the
London area since the early 1950s.
But the number of such clubs is still
limited and there is scope for con-
siderable development on a much
wider scale throughout the country.
The following account relating to the
inauguration of a therapeutic social
club in Halifax is presented as a
means of indicating what can be done,
and what methods might be employed
to establish a successful unit in one's
immediate locality.
Object of club
Recent advances in the use of drugs
or chemo-therapy have done much to
relieve acute symptoms in mental ill-
ness in a short space of time, but the
secure and protected atmosphere of a
mental hospital limits the degree to
which the rehabilitation and re-
socialisation of the patient can be
effected. It is in this latter aspect ot
treatment or therapy towards cure
that the club unit has an extremely
valuable part to play. The advantages
provided by a club fall into two main
categories: (a) This is related to the
hospital service and the growth of
activity i?i relation to out-patient
departments. With the considerable
increase in the number of patients
being referred to out-patient depart-
ments the psychiatrist faces a problem
of limited time for consultations which
have real therapeutic value. This
situation also produces long waiting
periods for the patients themselves,
which could mean financial loss owing
to time off from work. These circum'
stances also tend to exaggerate the
sense of incapacity which a hospital
atmosphere engenders in the patient-
The psychiatrist has to undertake
examination of new cases which may
require intensive investigation; and he
finds much time having to be give11
to casual follow-up cases which cat1
be dealt with at a social club unit.
(b) A social club unit affords t'lL
opportunity for the psychiatrist to set
the ex-hospital patient in a dynaW,
social setting by means of which he lS
able to observe the patient's personQ
difficulty, for example, severe wit'1'
drawal symptoms. The friendship an
social atmosphere of a club can als?
200
be a great help to the lonely, friend-
less and shy person who finds great
difficulty in making personal relation-
ships. The club, with its understand-
ing of mental illness problems can
help the individual patient to develop
his relationships with others and to
participate in social activity. It can
foster the patient's willingness to
accept responsibility, and in doing so
regain his or her self-confidence.
Discussion to action
The Halifax therapeutic social club
unit, which was established in January
1961, was the product of co-operation
between the consultant psychiatrist of
Storthes Hall Mental Hospital, the
Corporation's Health Committee and
the Halifax Council of Social Service.
The role played by the consultant
Psychiatrist in the formation of such
a unit cannot be over-emphasised. In
Halifax it was the psychiatrist's
enthusiasm for, and firm belief in, the
effectiveness of such a unit as a
rnethod of treatment and rehabilita-
tion for the ex-patient that produced
a determined response from the local
community; a response which in turn
Provided premises, equipment and
voluntary helpers within a very short
space of time, as a means of launch-
Ing the project.
It was at a public meeting held in
the town during World Mental Health
Year that the psychiatrist expressed
bis opinion on the need for a thera-
peutic club. He went to great lengths
lr* describing the function of the club,
and the way in which the ex-mental
Patient would derive benefit from its
Activities. In moving from discussion
to action, it was realised that premises
Would be the first problem. Inten-
Slve enquiry, however, revealed that
Premises as administered by the local
Welfare Services Committee were not
utilised to the maximum. An applica-
tion ^ was submitted to the Welfare
^ervices Committee for the use of
^ese premises on one evening per
Week. The premises consisted of an
fXceptionally large room which could
e used for dancing activities, etc.,
and also a smaller room for group
discussion, in addition to canteen
facilities. The local Health Committee
had indicated that they were willing
to meet the cost of rent, which was
fixed by the Welfare Services Com-
mittee at 25s. per meeting. On this
basis the Welfare Services Committee
were agreeable that the premises
should be made available for the
purpose in mind.
Voluntary workers were then
provided through the Council of
Social Service, and the Mental Welfare
Officers and the Local Authority
showed keen enthusiasm and support
from the beginning. The question of
members was carefully handled by the
psychiatrist, who undertook to refer
certain types of patients who would
benefit by the club. This was of
fundamental importance, as it was
essential that patients showing anti-
social tendencies, e.g., aggressive
behaviour, should not be referred?in
the interests of the club and the other
ex-patients.
Membership and activities
There are now 127 members, 49 of
them male and 78 female. 41 of
these come from outside the borough
boundary. In its activities, the club
emphasises the part played by dis-
cussion groups, especially those led by
the psychiatrist himself. This provides
opportunity to encourage individual
members to express their opinions on
a wide range of topics, some of them
having a bearing on their own
personal problems. In lighter activi-
ties, the club provides dances, musical
entertainment and an opportunity to
participate in a painting group, with
emphasis on self-expression. No great
aspirations of a creative kind are
involved in these activities, which are
used simply as an encouragement to
individual members to participate in
common activity with others.
For those patients who feel they are
in need of greater support from the
psychiatrist, or his advice on some
personal problem, arrangements are
made whereby he can be seen during
201
the half-hour preceding the opening of
the club, which meets one evening
each week. The Mental Welfare
Officer is also in attendance at the
club, and able to discuss personal
matters with the patients. The part
played by voluntary helpers is an
important one in that they can assist
the ex-patients to participate in the
various activities, and in discussion.
Voluntary workers with particular
aptitudes and know-how in relation to
specific activities such as drama,
concert party work, painting, etc., can
be most useful in leading small
activity-groups.
The club is run by its own
elected Committee, the officers con-
sisting of Chairman, Hon. Secretary,
and Treasurer. In the initial stages it
was found that there was a lack of
experience on the part of the patients
to fill these offices, and here again the
voluntary helpers can be of great
assistance in providing advice and
guidance to the Club Committee. It
was considered important, however,
that the Committee should be com-
posed of the ex-patients themselves as
a means of encouraging a sense of
responsibility and self-confidence.
Financial considerations do not give
rise to any serious difficulty. As men-
tioned before, the rent is paid by the
Health Department. In the initial
stages of the club's formation, the
Health Department were most helpful
in providing an equipment grant of
?50 which enabled the club to
purchase a record player and other
indoor games equipment which has
proved extremely useful. Income
derived from the sale of refreshments
and raffles has proved sufficient to
meet other minor forms of expendi-
ture that arise from time to time.
When the club is presenting a film
show special invitations are sent out
to other organisations whose work is
related to mental health, and also to
G.Ps. and social workers in the town.
These film sessions can provide oppor-
tunities for influencing public opinion
in matters relating to mental health as
a whole. Experience from the work
of this club to date has shown that
the ex-patient passing through the
club can make an excellent voluntary
worker in manning those services
required to meet the needs of the
mentally ill. The recently-formed
Samaritan Service in Halifax has a
considerable proportion of members
who have been patients at the unit in
the past.
Ex-patients are also well-represented
in our local Association for Mental
Health. The Association itself was
formed six months after the opening
of the social club when it was realised
that our local mental health services
might become fragmentated and that
a need for some co-ordination would
arise. Members of the Association
take a keen interest in this club,
and are now considering beginning
an experimental project concerning
patients in the psychiatric ward of the
local hospital. This will take the form
of a smaller club unit which will then
feed their members to the therapeutic
social club already functioning.
No community service can be really
effective without the support of the
psychiatrist. In this respect, the unit
provides opportunities for even
trained social workers to widen their
knowledge and understanding of
mental illness, and to appreciate the
techniques that have to be employed
by the psychiatrist in dealing with
his many human problems. Com-
munity care must mean willingness on
the part of the psychiatrist to come
out of the hospital with the patient
in order to give a lead to the com-
munity in providing the essential
services. Halifax has been extremely
fortunate in having a psychiatrist
willing to give time and to share his
enthusiasm amongst all persons and
organisations wishing to assist in
meeting this challenge.
