TAKE 1
South
Ockendon
South Ockendon subnormality hospital in Essex
has had its unfair share of bad publicity recently.
An allegation of cruelty by a nurse and the man-
slaughter of one patient by another led to news
reports?some of which have been angled to hurt
the staff?and, predictably, morale within the
hospital has suffered badly.
The outburst of righteous indignation which
followed the Ely Hospital Report made both public
and politicians briefly aware that all was not well
in Britain's subnormality hospitals. The politicians
may have known better but the public, unaware of
the near-crisis understating and overcrowding in
many of the hospitals, have been apt to lay blame
on the nurses. Nurses from South Ockendon have
had to endure taunts like 'Where are your jack-
boots?' when out in the adjoining village.
Anyone who knows anything about the sub-
normality hospital service knows how unfair this
collective condemnation is. On one afternoon
when I was at South Ockendon recently there
were 34 nurses looking after 10 female wards with
486 patients and 37 male nurses (9 of them were
working overtime) looking after 11 men's wards
containing 509 patients.
This was not an exceptional day?it indicates
the resources with which William Searle, head of
nursing services, has to juggle all the time. He
has a work force of 258 nurses (76 fully trained)
to spread over two day shifts and a night shift.
The spread is ridiculously thin and the total num-
ber is regularly whittled down by holidays, courses
and sickness. Because nursing has to be concen-
trated on the most difficult, disturbed wards some
of the other wards are manned?if that is the
right word?by one sister with an assistant in
training coping with 46 patients.
South Ockendon's staffing problems are pro-
bably more acute than most because of its geo-
graphical position. As the physician superintend-
ent, Dr. Gordon Dutton, said: 'Local industry has
the edge on us all along the line.'
There is a concentration of industry in the area.
Dagenham and Fords are close by, so are Plessey
Electronics and innumerable light industries.
Industry offers more fringe benefits and as much
money for a five-day week as the hospital can for
seven-day-a-week shift work. If a man can earn
?27 a week on a bread-round in the area, it is
unrealistic to expect him to go on nursing?hov
ever much he may be devoted to the job, the'
comes a point where, given the chance to provK
his family with a better living, he literally canC
afford to go on nursing.
As one charge nurse put it: 'The old concept'
nursing as a vocation still exists as far as the poWe
that be are concerned, but those days are gon^ j
and gone for good.' j i
Another small, but nonetheless important, fact' i
helping to make the position at South Ocken^ '
exceptional is that the hospital is just one fl" ]
outside the area qualifying for a London 'weig^
ing' on staff salaries. Inclusion in the area wo^ '
mean another ?95 a year on a charge nurse's sal3 1
and would cost the regional board ?26,000 P '
annum overall. :
Over the last year the number of trained stj ~
at the hospital has remained constant, but 1
number of nursing assistants?the essential 'pair 1
hands' for the day-to-day care?has fallen s
63 in April 1968 to 47 now. There are also la^ ^
than normal numbers of vacancies for maint? $
ance and catering staff.
The nursing establishment is 17 per cent beK i
strength, added to which (more likely, in par* 9
least, because of it) there is a very high sickf
rate among staff. Of 37 ward staff off sick in 0 ?
week in April, 10 were fully qualified and \6 11
enrolled nurses. If the pressure of work was
perhaps the sick staff members would come W
to work when they felt better rather than act#
waiting until they were fully recovered. But a5
is, as Dr. Dutton says, 'People stay off until
are 100 per cent, knowing that, if they feel
the weather, they won't be able to cope witb
overcrowded ward.'
With a catchment area incorporating most of J
East End of London, the hospital seems to ge
higher proportion of disturbed patients than
The patients come from a tough environP1'
where children grow up familiar with violent
the streets and in the home.
'The grade of patients has certainly gone dosj
said Dr. Dutton. He quoted a break-down for
year's 128 new admissions?83% were sevejj
subnormal, 32% could not walk and 48% ,
serious behaviour problems. From these fig11
alone it is obvious that a high proportion
34
Clients need intensive care and this is just what
Cannot be provided with the existing staff/patient
ratio.
An average, worked out on the day I was there,
would be one member of nursing staff to 12^
Patients (the Ministry's ideal is 1:4), but the figure
?es not mean much unless related to the job that
^eds to be done. If the nursing was purely super-
ls?ry the ratio would be almost tolerable, but
bat is needed in fact is much nearer to intensive
^are. A random day's statistics from the Hospital
Activity Analysis give some idea of the demands
upon the staff and show what 'nursing' in
"ls context really means:
There were 1,016 patients in the hospital, of
hom 18 were bed-ridden; 141 non-ambulant; 165
???rly ambulant; 440 incontinent of urine; 289
Continent of faeces; 261 needed feeding; 566
eeded dressing; 307 were epileptic; 426 needed
Pecial observation; and 289 were subject to un-
indictable behaviour.
^he situation became so critical in April, during
? police inquiries into the manslaughter and
the Press inquisition was in full swing, that
r- Dutton suspended admissions. Questions were
jn the House?on the crest of the Ely wave
< Richard Crossman pronounced the hospital
l^fcrowded' and said he intended to syphon off
^ patients into other hospitals to ease the pres-
? Baroness Serota, the then recently appointed
? lister at the Department of Health and Social
purity, visited the hospital to assess the problem.
j^e impressed the staff with her ability to make
^ Mediate contact, her background knowledge
her grasp and appreciation.of their difficulties.
Whatever the concern, and however many the
??d intentions, the basic problem of slow recruit-
ent and too many patients remains at South
Ockendon as at many other subnormality hospitals
throughout the country. Piecemeal solutions and
stop-gap plans may alleviate the immediate prob-
lem but the basic one will inevitably recur.
According to Ministry figures, Dr. Dutton has
got 483 patients too many. He has a further 250
on the waiting list. The Ministry's recommended
size for subnormality hospitals is 'no more than
500 beds'. Therefore, to overcome the overcrowd-
ing and cope with the waiting list, Dr. Dutton esti-
mates that another four or five hospitals are
needed just in the south Essex area.
Because South Ockendon Hospital is in a state
of crisis, and because it is the first hospital on
which attention has been focused after the shock
of the Ely Report, positive action to improve the
situation will probably be taken. But South Ocken-
don is not unique; it is not a 'special case'; if direct
Ministerial intervention does yield results there
are likely to be physician superintendents in many
parts of the country saying: 'Why not my hospital
too?' Dr. Dutton says: 'I'm lucky to have got my
shopping list in first.'
Mr. Searle, who tackles the day-to-day problem
of keeping the wards of South Ockendon staffed,
cannot afford to have elusions about nursing the
subnormal. He says the character of the nursing
has changed radically now that virtually all the
admissions really need hospital care and the
essential urgent move is to get the local authorities
to provide facilities for patients for whom the
hospital staff are acting solely as guardians.
Both he and Dr. Dutton agree that there are
about 150 people in South Ockendon who could
almost immediately be taken into other forms of
care within the community if they existed. Mr.
Searle wants local authorities to be made aware
of their responsibilities in this context and
favours 'model village' schemes for subnormals
not needing intensive care.
Considering the type of care which has to be
provided on many of the wards, it is obviously
essential to accelerate the development of alterna-
tives to hospital care for 'high grade' patients. In
one ward there are 46 severely subnormal children
who also have severe physical handicaps. Only 8
can feed themselves, only 8 are not incontinent and
about 6 can walk. This leaves about 40 who need
constant nursing care and the usual staffing on the
ward is the sister plus three nurses. They are very
hard-pressed just to keep their 10 patients per head
clean and fed, let alone be able to do any attentive
therapeutic nursing, but they try.
Mr. Searle wants to develop two streams of
nursing intake. One group of selected students,
trained to keep pace with the doctor, understand
what he is talking about clinically and carry out
his treatment instructions. The other intake would
be broader based, for mature married women who
would bring simple, warm, human feelings as their
qualification to undertake the day-to-day care of
patients. This category could be employed part-
time to fit in with their domestic commitments.
The place of older women with compassion and
intelligence in the nursing service was emphasised
by Sister Nicholas in the admission and 'physical'
ward. She was sure that if recruitment methods
made it clear that extensive training was not neces-
sary for about 90% of nursing work, many more
women in their 30s and 40s would be attracted
into the service. 'But all of us tend to forget what
a shock it is when you're first introduced into a
ward,' she said. 'A gentle introduction would help
enormously but, because of the staff shortage, it is
impossible to provide one. So for everyone you
get, you probably lose one other because they're
thrown in the deep end first and feel they can
cope.'
Mr. Searle is convinced that by building larg1
hospitals for subnormals a social service was don?
but 'we have let society off the hook'. The con1
munity has to be re-educated to understand #
responsibilities towards the subnormal. 'Up
now the staff have shared the shame of the sub
normal hospital and not told their neighbour
where they worked.'
A kind of quiet, desperate inertia has crept in*1
the service. As Mr. Searle puts it: 'The problem
has been with us for so long it's like having off
leg shorter than the other?you learn to live wi*'
the pain. We've been living with the pain for year
now.'
Perhaps the saddest facet of the whole proble11
of overcrowding and understaffing is that tb
nurses know better than anybody that they are n?
doing the job properly because it just is not poi
sible. 'You train staff, tell them what they oug^
to do and then put them in a situation where the
can't do it,' said Dr. Dutton. 'The frustrati0'
aspect is the worst part of the whole problem.'
In such conditions flashpoints are bound 1
occur and violence can flare up by the very natur
of some of the patients. Between January afj
February this year 28 staff were injured ^
needed medical attention and 125 patients
injured by other patients?'directly accounta^1
to overcrowding. It is the only way they have c
demonstrating their frustration, to break a wind^
or a locker or worse,' said Mr. Searle.
'We're doing better than we should with
we've got,' he said. 'I'm constantly amazed by ^
way my staff keep going. After all, if you were -
men short in industry they just wouldn't set $
machine coine. Here vou can't stop the machi^
John Pay"
