Hebraic Civilisation and the Science o? Man.
Second Mary Hemingway Rees
Memorial Lecture by Henri Baruk. (Translated by Philip Polack). (H. K.
Lewis & Co. Ltd., for World Federation for Mental Health. 5s. pp. 76.)
We are told in the preface to this publication, contributed by Dr. E. E. Krapf,
that Prof. Baruk is known as the "father of moral psychiatry", and even the most
cursory reading will show the reason for his having won this reputation.
In an absorbingly interesting introduction he records what led him to devote his
attention to Hebraic civilisation, following on his appointment of medical superinten-
dent of the Maison Nationale de Charenton, Paris, in 1931, at a time when staff morale
was at its lowest under the threat of ultimate abolition. After three years of unceasing
effort and immense difficulties, he succeeded in replacing "despotic self-seeking by
impartial inquiry and the unflinching search for truth".
This experience of the havoc wrought in a community by the lack of any sense
of justice and truth so impressed him that he determined to learn Hebrew in order
to study the Old Testament, the Torah and other relevant literature, since he found
here the record of a civilisation possessing a formulated "science of man" based on
the concept of Unity of the individual and society "assured by the internal inspiration
which distinguishes good from evil, the inspiration of God that is immanent in the
heart of each one of us, defending truth, choosing between good and evil".
The exposition of his theme with the psychological implications of the laws and
traditions of the Hebrews from the time of Abraham onwards, is learned, brilliant
and eminently readable. It should have the effect of sending the serious student back
to the Old Testament?too often set aside as being without relevance to present day
problems and unconcerned with "mental health". Moreover, it contains? in addition
to valuable factual information?so rich a store of ideas and reflections that it would
form an admirable subject for group discussion.
A. L. Hargrove
Printed by C.M.D. Printers Ltd. at Dragon Press, Luton.
